Polkadot Protocol > On-Chain Governance > Overview (#167)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/onchain-governance/overview.md

---

> title: Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: On-Chain Governance Overview
```

> description: TODO

Reviewer: missing description

> description: TODO

Reviewer: missing description

@kapetan3sid wdyt about this one? seems like a CTA to me haha but maybe it works..

```suggestion
description: Explore Polkadot’s advanced governance model, OpenGov, where direct democracy, flexible voting options, and stakeholder participation drive network evolution.
```

---

> # Governance Overview
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# On-Chain Governance 

## Introduction

```

Polkadot employs an advanced governance system designed to facilitate continuous, adaptable evolution directed by its community of stakeholders. 

This approach ensures that those holding the majority of stake retain control over the network’s direction.

> At the core of Polkadot’s innovation are several novel mechanisms, including a flexible, on-chain state-transition function written in **WebAssembly** (a platform-agnostic language) and multiple on-chain voting methods, such as referenda and batch approval voting. 

Reviewer: This paragraph does not make a lot of sense to me, I'd remove this part: "flexible, on-chain state-transition function written in **WebAssembly**", and just focus on the on-chain voting mechanism. WDYT of the following:

```suggestion
The Polkadot blockchain incorporates a powerful on-chain governance mechanism, empowering the community to actively participate in decision-making and shape the network's future through decentralized, on-chain processes.
```

Any protocol changes must gain approval through stake-weighted referenda, aligning network updates with the will of the community.

## Premise

> Polkadot's initial governance system, **Governance V1**, consisted of three core components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot's initial governance system, [**Governance V1**](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn/learn-governance){target=\_blank}, consisted of three core components:
```

> Polkadot's initial governance system, **Governance V1**, consisted of three core components:

Author: I just created a short summary of what Gov1 is and added a link to the Wiki page

> - **Technical Committee**: A technocratic body responsible for overseeing and managing the timelines for protocol upgrades.
> - **Council**: An elected executive "government", chosen through approval voting, responsible for managing key parameters, administrative functions, and spending proposals.
> - **Public**: Composed of all token holders, who participated directly in voting and referenda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Technical committee** - a technocratic body responsible for overseeing and managing the timelines for protocol upgrades
- **Council** - an elected executive "government" chosen through approval voting, responsible for managing key parameters, administrative functions, and spending proposals
- **Public** - composed of all token holders who participated directly in voting and referenda
```

Over its initial years, **Governance V1** ensured responsible use of treasury funds and enabled timely protocol upgrades and fixes. Like many early-stage technologies, protocols must evolve as they mature to address limitations and align with modern advancements. 

**Governance V1**, however, had certain structural limitations: all referenda held equal weight, allowing only one to be voted on at a time (except in emergencies), and each voting period could extend over several weeks. 

Additionally, an alternating timetable permitted voting on either a public referendum or a council motion every 28 days (or 7 days on Kusama), which led to careful deliberation but limited the number of proposals considered.

> **OpenGov** revises the mechanisms for day-to-day decision-making, enhancing the scope and agility of referenda outcomes. This change enables the system to handle a higher volume of collective decisions at any given time.

Reviewer: as this is the first time that "OpenGov" is mentioned,it would be nice to add a short definition of it or maybe a link to an external reference

Author: I made it a separate subsection and added a short sentence that describes it

The following sections cover the key features of **OpenGov** and highlight its main distinctions from previous governance versions. 

!!!note
    Familiarity with [**Governance V1**](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn/learn-governance){target=\_blank} will provide valuable context for understanding the need for and direction of OpenGov. 

## OpenGov Summary

In **Governance V1**, network upgrade decisions were managed collaboratively by active token holders and the Council. 

Proposals, regardless of whether they originated from the public or the Council, ultimately required a referendum, allowing all token holders to participate in the decision-making process.

The Council acted as a representative body for the public, overseeing the treasury and initiating legislation. 

However, it was sometimes perceived as a centralized authority. To enhance decentralization, **OpenGov** introduces these primary changes:

> - **Transferring all Council responsibilities to the public** through a direct democracy voting system.
> - **Dissolving the Council** to eliminate the centralized decision-making body.
> - **Expanding delegation options** so users can transfer voting power to trusted community members in various ways.
> - **Replacing the Technical Committee** with the Polkadot Technical Fellowship, a broader, community-oriented group.

Reviewer: we can add a link to Polkadot Technical Fellowship, I'm wondering if this would be the best source: https://polkadot-fellows.xyz/

```suggestion
- **Transferring all Council responsibilities to the public** through a direct democracy voting system
- **Dissolving the Council** to eliminate the centralized decision-making body.
- **Expanding delegation options** so users can transfer voting power to trusted community members in various ways
- **Replacing the Technical Committee** with the Polkadot Technical Fellowship, a broader, community-oriented group
```

The diagram below provides an overview of the structure and changes introduced with Polkadot OpenGov.

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/onchan-governance/opengov-structure.webp)

### Origins and Tracks

In Polkadot OpenGov, **Origins** and **Tracks** are key components in the governance process:

> An **Origin** defines the level of privilege or authorization a proposal has. It determines who can submit a proposal and what kind of proposal it is. For example, a proposal could come from a Treasury Origin for treasury-related requests, or from a Council Origin, which requires Council approval before voting.
> 
> A **Track** is the process or pipeline a proposal follows after submission. It outlines how the proposal is handled, including how long the voting period lasts and other procedural details. Each Origin is linked to a specific Track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Origin** defines the privilege level or authorization of a proposal. It determines who can submit a proposal and what kind of proposal it is. For example, a proposal could come from a `Treasury Origin` for treasury-related requests or from a `Council Origin`, which requires `Council` approval before voting
- **Track** - process that a proposal follows after submission. It outlines how the proposal is handled, including how long the voting period lasts and other procedural details. Each `Origin` is linked to a specific `Track`
```

!!!note

>     More on Tracks and Origins is explained on [this](link to Tracks and Origins page) page.

Reviewer: What about these links? I don't get if the idea would be to link above or, to link to an external source

> In Polkadot OpenGov, proposals are initiated by the public and enter a Lead-in period before following a specific **Track** with a dedicated **Origin**. There are [**15 Origins**](link to Origin & Tracks section), each with preset parameters that define the referendum’s duration and the number of simultaneous votes. 

Reviewer: What about these links? I don't get if the idea would be to link above or, to link to an external source

Author: same as the above - essentially it's TO DO

**Support:** The proportion of **"aye"** and **"abstain"** votes (unweighted by conviction) against the total possible votes (active issuance). In cases of split votes, only **"aye"** and **"abstain"** are counted.

**Example:** Suppose total active issuance is 100 DOT:

- Account A votes "Aye" with 10 DOT at 4x conviction

- Account B votes "Nay" with 5 DOT at 2x conviction

- Account C votes "Abstain" with 20 DOT (no conviction applies to abstain)

With only 35 DOT participating, the values are calculated as follows:

`Approval = Aye' / (Aye' + Nay’) = (10 × 4) / (10 × 4 + 5 × 2) = 40 / 50 = 80%`

`Support = (Aye + Abstain) / (Total Active Issuance) = (10 + 20) / 100 = 30%`

!!!note "Nay votes are not counted towards Support"
    Support reflects voters who voted **"aye"** or chose to **"abstain"** excluding **"nay"** votes to avoid unintended outcomes. 
    
    This setup ensures that a **"nay"** vote cannot inadvertently push a referendum into the confirming state by raising support above the threshold without lowering approval.

The figure illustrates the following points:

> 1. A proposal enters the confirmation period only when both approval and support thresholds are met. Even if approval is above the approval curve, the proposal will wait until support also surpasses the support curve.
> 
> 2. If a referendum holds the approval and support thresholds for the entire confirmation period, it’s approved and scheduled for enactment. Tracks like Root enforce longer Enactment Periods to allow time for network adjustments, although proposers can opt for a longer enactment period.
> 
> 3. If the referendum exits the confirmation period (e.g., due to new "nay" votes), the confirmation clock resets. For instance, if it exits after 5 minutes in a 20-minute confirmation period, it must complete a fresh 20-minute confirmation upon re-entry.
> 
> 4. Should a referendum meet thresholds at the very end of the decision period, it can still pass if it confirms through the entire track-specific confirmation period. Otherwise, it’s rejected if it exits confirmation after the decision period ends.
> 
> 5. The approval curve starts at 100%, decreasing to a minimum of 50%. For a proposal to pass, weighted support must stay above 50%, assuming all tokens are actively voted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A proposal enters the confirmation period only when both approval and support thresholds are met. Even if approval is above the approval curve, the proposal will wait until support also surpasses the support curve

2. If a referendum holds the approval and support thresholds for the entire confirmation period, it’s approved and scheduled for enactment. Tracks like Root enforce longer Enactment Periods to allow time for network adjustments, although proposers can opt for a longer enactment period

3. The confirmation clock resets if the referendum exits the confirmation period (e.g., due to new "nay" votes). For instance, if it exits after 5 minutes in a 20-minute confirmation period, it must complete a fresh 20-minute confirmation upon re-entry

4. Should a referendum meet thresholds at the end of the decision period, it can still pass if confirmed through the entire track-specific confirmation period. Otherwise, it’s rejected if it exits confirmation after the decision period ends

5. The approval curve starts at 100%, decreasing to a minimum of 50%. For a proposal to pass, weighted support must stay above 50%, assuming all tokens are actively voted
```

Tracks for different **Origins** have unique **Confirmation Periods** and distinct approval and support requirements.

Proposals using lower-privilege origins can often reach the required support more easily, while higher-privilege origins, like `Root`, maintain stricter support requirements.

## Enactment

In Polkadot OpenGov, the proposer suggests the enactment period, but there is also a minimum set for each Origin Track. 

For example, `Root` origin approvals require an extended period because of the importance of the changes they bring to the network.

## Cancelling, Killing & Blacklisting

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Note that to successfully cast votes you need to have the [existential deposit](add link to Existential deposit in Accounts section) and some additional funds to pay for transaction fees.

In general, you can remove your vote:

- While a referendum is ongoing (your vote does not count)
- After a referendum ended (your vote counts)

If you voted without conviction, there's no conviction lock in either case. If you voted with conviction, you only get a conviction lock if the referendum ended and you voted with the winning side.

Check diagram below for more information:

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/onchan-governance/voting-locks.webp)

### Voting Without Conviction

If you vote without conviction and the referendum is still ongoing, you can remove your vote and immediately unlock your tokens. 

If the referendum has ended, you can also remove your vote and unlock your tokens right away, regardless of whether you supported the winning or losing side. 

The governance app or interface you used to participate in Polkadot OpenGov will provide an option to unlock your tokens.

### Voting With Conviction

If you vote with conviction, the following applies:

> - **Referendum is ongoing:** **You can remove your vote and unlock your tokens immediately.
> - **Referendum ended (losing side):** You can remove your vote and unlock your tokens immediately.
> - **Referendum ended (winning side):** A conviction lock will be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Referendum is ongoing** - you can remove your vote and unlock your tokens immediately
- **Referendum ended (losing side)** - you can remove your vote and unlock your tokens immediately
- **Referendum ended (winning side)** - a conviction lock will be applied
```

![](/images/polkadot-protocol/onchan-governance/delegation-locks-2.webp)

!!!note "Before delegating a specific track, you must remove any vote on that track"
    If the account delegated votes to different delegates using different convictions, then after undelegating those delegates, there will be different unlocking periods with lengths dependent on the conviction multipliers.

It’s important to note that **delegating voting power does not give the delegate control over the delegator’s funds**. 

The delegate can only vote on the specified tracks using the delegator's voting power, but they cannot transfer balances, change validator nominations, or execute any actions other than voting.

The purpose of delegations is to ensure that proposals meet the required support for enactment while maintaining a censorship-free design. 

Delegations also help voters who may lack the technical expertise to evaluate certain referenda or simply don’t have the time to engage with all the proposals. By delegating their voting power to trusted entities, voters can participate in OpenGov in a more hands-off manner.

> ## Resources
> - [Democracy pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/democracy/src){about=|_blank}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Resources

- [Democracy pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/democracy/src){about=|_blank}
```

---
title: On-Chain Governance Overview
description: Discover Polkadot’s cutting-edge OpenGov system, enabling transparent, decentralized decision-making through direct democracy and flexible governance tracks.
---

# On-Chain Governance 

## Introduction

Polkadot’s governance system exemplifies decentralized decision-making, empowering its community of stakeholders to shape the network’s future through active participation. The latest evolution, OpenGov, builds on Polkadot’s foundation by providing a more inclusive and efficient governance model.

This guide will explain the principles and structure of OpenGov and walk you through its key components, such as Origins, Tracks, and Delegation. You will learn about improvements over earlier governance systems, including streamlined voting processes and enhanced stakeholder participation.

With OpenGov, Polkadot achieves a flexible, scalable, and democratic governance framework that allows multiple proposals to proceed simultaneously, ensuring the network evolves in alignment with its community's needs.

## Governance Evolution

> Polkadot’s governance journey began with Governance V1, a system that proved effective in managing treasury funds and protocol upgrades. However, it faced limitations, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot’s governance journey began with [`Governance V1`](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn/learn-governance#governance-summary){target=\_blank}, a system that proved effective in managing treasury funds and protocol upgrades. However, it faced limitations, such as:
```

Reviewer 2: Edited suggestion to remove back ticks from Governance V1

Visit [Multirole Delegation](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-opengov#multirole-delegation){target=\_blank} for more details on delegating voting power.

### Cancel a Referendum

Polkadot OpenGov has two origins for rejecting ongoing referendums: 

- [**Referendum Canceller**](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-opengov-origins#referendum-canceller){target=\_blank} - cancels an active referendum when non-malicious errors occur and refunds the deposits to the originators
- [**Referendum Killer**](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-opengov-origins#referendum-killer){target=\_blank} - used for urgent, malicious cases this origin instantly terminates an active referendum and slashes deposits

See [Cancelling, Killing, and Blacklisting](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-polkadot-opengov#cancelling-killing--blacklisting){target=\_blank} for additional information on rejecting referendums.

## Additional Resources

> - [Democracy pallet](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/democracy/src){target=\_blank} - handles administration of general stakeholder voting
> - [Gov2: Polkadot’s Next Generation of Decentralised Governance](https://medium.com/polkadot-network/gov2-polkadots-next-generation-of-decentralised-governance-4d9ef657d11b){target=\_blank} - Medium article by Gavin Wood
> - [Polkadot Direction](https://matrix.to/#/#Polkadot-Direction:parity.io){target=\_blank} -  Matrix Element client
> - [PolkAssembly](https://polkadot.polkassembly.io/){target=\_blank} - OpenGov dashboard and UI
> - [PolkadotJS Governance](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/referenda){target=\_blank} - overview of active referendums

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Democracy pallet**](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/tree/master/substrate/frame/democracy/src){target=\_blank} - handles administration of general stakeholder voting
- [**Gov2: Polkadot’s Next Generation of Decentralised Governance**](https://medium.com/polkadot-network/gov2-polkadots-next-generation-of-decentralised-governance-4d9ef657d11b){target=\_blank} - Medium article by Gavin Wood
- [**Polkadot Direction**](https://matrix.to/#/#Polkadot-Direction:parity.io){target=\_blank} -  Matrix Element client
- [**Polkassembly**](https://polkadot.polkassembly.io/){target=\_blank} - OpenGov dashboard and UI
- [**Polkadot.js Apps Governance**](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/referenda){target=\_blank} - overview of active referendums
```
